Documented how media and network payload is calculated (#619)
dmf-mxl/mxl: docs/FabricsBandwidth.md

<!-- SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Contributors to the Media eXchange Layer project. -->
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0 -->

# MXL Fabric: Media Payload Calculation

## Goal
Estimate wire bandwidth for MXL media streams across libfabric providers.

## Assumptions and Units
- Media payload math is provider-agnostic.
- Transport overhead math is provider-specific and driven by a provider profile.
- This document starts with one provider profile: `rdma_rocev2`.
- Rates are presented in decimal units (`MB/s = 10^6 B/s`, `GB/s = 10^9 B/s`).

---

## 1) Media Payload Calculation (Protocol-Agnostic)

This section calculates raw media byte rate before adding network or protocol overhead.

### Video (v210)

$$
bytesPerFrame(w,h) = \lceil \frac{w}{48} \rceil \times 128 \times h
$$

Equivalent integer form used in MXL implementation:

> - `v210LineBytes = ((w + 47) / 48) * 128`

Reviewer: @mlefebvre1 It's per line, so I think the original is correct.

$$

$$
mediaBytesPerSecond = bytesPerFrame \times fps
$$

### Audio (float32 PCM)

$$
bytesPerPacket = channels \times sampleRate \times 4 \times ptime
$$

$$
mediaBytesPerSecond = channels \times sampleRate \times 4
$$

### Data (video/smpte291 in MXL)

MXL sets data grain payload to `4096 bytes` for `video/smpte291`.

$$
bytesPerGrain = 4096
$$

$$
mediaBytesPerSecond = bytesPerGrain \times grainRate
$$

---

## 2) MXL SDK/libfabric Provider Transport Model

This section converts media byte rate into packet rate and adds transport constraints.

### Provider Profile Contract

Use these transport constants per libfabric provider:
- `providerWireOverheadBytes`: per-packet bytes added on wire beyond media payload.
- `providerMtuOverheadBytes`: per-packet bytes that consume MTU budget.
- `effectivePayloadPerPacket = mtu - providerMtuOverheadBytes`.

Units and assumptions:
- All constants in this section are bytes.
- `mtu` is treated as the L3 packet budget used for payload calculations.

### Current Provider Profile: `rdma_rocev2`

Provider constants:
- `providerMtuOverheadBytes = 44`
- `providerWireOverheadBytes = 82`

Provenance of `providerWireOverheadBytes`:

> - This constant is a modeled, per-packet on-wire cost for the `rdma_rocev2` provider profile.

Reviewer 2: We are not talking about provider profiles anywhere else. So maybe we could reword this to a more informal:
```suggestion
- This constant is a modeled, per-packet on-wire cost for the verbs provider using RoCEv2.
```

Author: will use suggestion

- It is derived from protocol framing bytes that must be transmitted for each packet, not from media payload size.
- The value is assembled from fixed header/trailer fields under the assumptions listed below (no VLAN, no IPv4 options, no IB extension headers).

Derivation:
- `providerMtuOverheadBytes = 44 = IPv4(20) + UDP(8) + BTH(12) + ICRC(4)`
- Additional on-wire-only framing not counted in MTU payload budget:
	- `Preamble/SFD(8) + IFG(12) + Ethernet header(14) + FCS(4) = 38`
- Therefore:
	- `providerWireOverheadBytes = providerMtuOverheadBytes + 38 = 44 + 38 = 82`

Interpretation:
- Use `providerMtuOverheadBytes` to compute payload capacity per packet (`mtu - overhead`).
- Use `providerWireOverheadBytes` to compute true wire-rate amplification (`packetsPerSecond * overhead`).

> - Keeping both constants separate avoids mixing MTU-budget math and on-wire transmission-time math.

Reviewer 2: I think this remark is not really necessary 😄

Author: will remove the last bullet

### Packetization Formula

For packetized payload streams:

$$
packetsPerEvent = \lceil \frac{payloadBytesPerEvent}{mtu - providerMtuOverheadBytes} \rceil
$$

$$
packetsPerSecond = packetsPerEvent \times eventRate
$$

Where:
- `payloadBytesPerEvent` is payload bytes generated per event:
	- Video: `bytesPerFrame`
	- Audio: `bytesPerPacket` (per `ptime` event)
	- Data: `bytesPerGrain`
- `eventRate` is the number of events per second (`fps`, `1/ptime`, or `grainRate`).

---

## 3) Final Wire Bandwidth Calculation

$$
wireBytesPerSecond = mediaBytesPerSecond + packetsPerSecond \times providerWireOverheadBytes
$$

---

## 4) Worked Examples

All examples in this section use provider `rdma_rocev2` with:
- `providerMtuOverheadBytes = 44`
- `providerWireOverheadBytes = 82`

Naming convention used in examples:
- `payloadBytesPerEvent`: payload bytes generated by one media event.
- `packetsPerEvent`: packets needed for one media event.
- Media-specific aliases are shown in parentheses (for example, `packetsPerFrame`).

### Video Example (`video/v210`, `1920x1080p25`, `mtu=1400`)

Input values:
- `media_type = video/v210`
- `frame_width = 1920`
- `frame_height = 1080`
- `frame_rate = 25`

> - `mtu = 1400` (transport assumption used in this document)

Reviewer 3: for RoCEv2 it should be one of 1024,2048 or 4096
same comment for all other examples

Author: will make the changes

Final wire rate:
- `wireBytesPerSecond = 384,000 + 24,600 = 408,600 B/s`
- `wireRate = 408,600 / 1,000,000 = 0.4086 MB/s ~= 0.41 MB/s`

### Data Example (`grainRate=60`, `mtu=1400`)

Input values:
- `media_type = video/smpte291`
- `bytesPerGrain = 4,096`
- `grainRate = 60`
- `mtu = 1400` (transport assumption used in this document)

Format notes:
- MXL uses fixed data grain payload size of `4,096` bytes for `video/smpte291`.
- One grain is one packetization event for this calculation model.

Media payload:
- `bytesPerGrain = 4,096`
- `mediaBytesPerSecond = bytesPerGrain * 60 = 4,096 * 60 = 245,760 B/s`

Network/protocol:
- `effectivePayloadPerPacket = 1400 - providerMtuOverheadBytes = 1400 - 44 = 1,356 bytes`
- `payloadBytesPerEvent (bytesPerGrain) = 4,096`
- `eventRate (grainRate) = 60`
- `packetsPerEvent (packetsPerGrain) = (4,096 + 1,356 - 1) / 1,356 = 4` (integer division, round-up form)
- `packetsPerSecond = packetsPerEvent * eventRate = 4 * 60 = 240`
- `overheadBytesPerSecond = 240 * 82 = 19,680 B/s`

Final wire rate:
- `wireBytesPerSecond = 245,760 + 19,680 = 265,440 B/s`
- `wireRate = 265,440 / 1,000,000 = 0.26544 MB/s ~= 0.27 MB/s`

---

## Practical Notes

> - For audio, wire bandwidth is ptime-sensitive because packet count and per-packet overhead change with ptime, even when raw media byte rate is constant.

Reviewer 2: We should explain what `ptime` means in our context (I guess you mean the commit batch size?), because `ptime` sounds a lot like PTP, but it has nothing to do with that.

Author: how about 'a audio grain duration is the semantical equivalent to what 2110 refers as ptime'?

Reviewer: Maybe you could add "packet time", just to clarify: 'a audio grain duration is the semantical equivalent to what 2110 refers as ptime (packet time)'.

Author: ok
